April NWO Food Groups Meeting: Dryden & Surrounding Areas


Date: Monday May 3rd, 2021
Time: 1 pm - 2 pm (central time)
Location: Zoom | ID: 889 1355 3141| 
Facilitator: Jen Springett, Northwest Coordinator, Local Food & Farm Co-ops

Invitees:
Northwest Beef : Brent Cadeau
Parrs Jars: Bobbie Parr
AgriTech North: Benjamin Feagin Jr.
Pure Blend Pasta: Bobbi Turpin
Shannon Mackey, Homegrown Kombucha
807 Collective: Natalie Welniak
Northwest Beef: Linda Debney
Samantha Hawkins

Regrets: 



Agenda:

Role Delegations (1 min)
Agenda Review (5 min)
Check In (5 min)
We have graded eggs!!
Distribution ideas to collect from Emo
Decide on name for group/multi-producer box (807 Collective?)
Group parameters
Who will lead the group?
How will decisions be made regarding product contributions?
Strategies to ensure competitiveness (area restaurant whole food boxes)
How to encourage a collaborative, rather than competitive spirit within the group
How will the box be organized, marketed and distributed?
If a coordinator is appointed, how will they be compensated long term?
What is the group’s mission? Vision? What values do you want to include?
What do we do and why do we do it? A mission statement is concise, outcome oriented, and inclusive. 
A vision provides future direction. What’s the end goal?
Do we want to do this exercise today,  or dedicate a meeting to developing these.
What business structure will best help you fulfill these goals?
An informal collective will suffice if the end goal is a collaborative food box ie replace the Locavore box program. 
An incorporated non-profit would be indicated, if funding support might be needed for shared infrastructure, if your mission is community driven (ie link producers to more consumers and build efficiencies), if you want to establish your own guidelines, and if you expect to need dedicated staff to fulfill the group’s mission.
Incorporating as a for-profit entity would only be logical if the collective/co-operative is expected to generate profits,  
Adjournment 2:00 pm


Group Summary including past history and opportunities discussed

Seven Guiding Principles of Co-operatives: Open and Voluntary Membership. Democratic Member Control. Members' Economic Participation. Autonomy and Independence. Education, Training, and Information. Cooperation Among Cooperatives. Concern for Community.

Towards a Feasible Cooperative 
Local Food and Farm Co-ops Membership Benefits

Apr 26th Action Items-
Connect Eggs to Bobbi/e (jen) DONE
Freezer space needed for Parr’s Jars for beef
Benjamin and Nat to connect re- bottling needs
Bobbie needs support to distribute a collaborative whole food box
Jen to follow up with NWHU on regulations on subleasing commercial kitchen and multi-vendor distribution (l/m)
Next meeting: Monday May 3rd. 
Establish collective & multi vendor box name
Discuss participation parameters
Establish group mission

May 3rd meeting minutes.

Agenda- change to prioritize mission and vision statement first, to inform business structure then name. Focus on box program second. 

Mission and Vision (see brainstorming documents. 

JS to summarize group contributions for reflection. Create statements next meeting. 

Leadership-

Small group board  (minimum of 5 to incorporate)
Bobbi: Treasurer (accountant)
Chair: Nat
Benjamin: secretary
Structure-

JS provided info re for-profit vs non-profit structures, including 7 guiding principles of co-operatives 
Group consensus to form without-share co-operative to meet its community objectives, given the mission and visions discussed are more community driven than profit driven, and a democratic participation and decision making structure is desired.

Board parameters-
Producers only, Regular contributors with established brand
Invitation only
Membership parameters- TBD

Names-

807 co-operative, 807 food co-op, 807 GROWcery co-op 

Group to reflect on these for final decision next week 
