Hello Ms.Bobbie,

Just a few things to bring an understanding to this.

CONCEPT CREATION:

As a sales consultant for Bell, many elderly and non-tech focused customers would occupy commission earning time with varying range of tech issue guidance (a courtesy we offer but not mandated assistance). We wanted to switch this to a service in the comfort of people's home or elsewhere that we could be paid for but offer tailored assistance.

This service is strongly focused on Mobile Phone Support. We do not do repairs but we can offer help with computer based applications (wifi set up etc)

PILLARS OF THE BUSINESS

(A) Tech Support and Guidance - From the simple email account creation, to answering basic questions and getting to know one's tech.

(B) Device Set-Up and Data Transfers - old and new device set ups, cross mobile phone operating system transfers and the peripherals therein, we offer assistance for that.

(C) Device Cleaning and Optimization - Malicious or predatory add removal, device updating and tools to help keeping the device running smoothly and efficiently

(D) New and Used Device Purchasing and Selling - We require tech to use as transfer pieces for demonstration and teaching. In addition we desire stock to sell on various markets to create a safe and reliable outlet for folks to buy from. This helps to avoid devices that may be on" negative files" which renders them useless for operational use. through the donation of phones we are able to keep operations lower for certain demographics.

(E) CAPS - Clerical and Administrative Personal Support - taking advantage of writing and speaking skills, we help individuals especially the elderly to submit pension documentations, apply for various services, write emails etc. 

CURRENT CHALLENGES

As a consultant for Bell there has been a concern that this may be seen as a conflict of interest as expressed by some. HOWEVER, this is a mobile tech support operation whereas Bell is a Device and Telecommunication Retail service. However this operation is not known to my employer but by my immediate supervising officers of which there is support for this - it helps to limit folks in the store and optimize commisison earning hours of operation.

As the business is advertised without my name being mentioned many question the authenticity of the business - essentially not a scam.

TO counter this we did a FREE program at the Dryden Go-Getters in June. Many customers from Bell and new customers came out and we got a small following on Facebook.

However to provide such services requires time to be taken off from work so income has to come from elsewhere. donation of tech has allowed from some of this to take place.

we charge $60 an hour but in the 6 months of operation we have only had 3 customers. apparently our pricing is quite high so we are considering rate reductions but we also need help understanding how and when and where to price our services.

funding and grants can help to provide MOBILE TECH SUPPORT Programs or pop-ups/clinics to service the community.

We have a few customers in Vermilion Bay and we have a meeting with the Happy-Go-Lucky Seniors Club to present our services. where transport is required, we obviously charge higher.

~Ryan