My why…

When I began to learn about our economic system in 2011, it led to a wealth of information about our societal structure and how Keynesian economics factors into that. How money is printed, how dollars derive their value and the conditions required for lengthened prosperity. It was obvious that we were living in a propped up system that was bound to fail sooner rather than later.

We planned our starter life (25yrs old at the time) with the fundamental understanding that we were in abundant times, and that it was unlikely to continue to be as cheap and simple in years to come. We developed a homestead, built our skills in self sufficiency and made strategic decisions to gain personal freedom. We aimed to maintain it even in the face of what I believed would be future tyranny—the way that collapsing systems often lash out. 

Then came Covid and the propaganda was evident to us right out the gate. This was the excuse the powers that be would use for systems already in decay. They were setting up conditions for chaos while sowing division, and going to enact “problem-reaction-solution”, ending in a transformed society that looks more like a slave system than the free world. I knew this because I’d read their books about doing it for a decade. They told us all about the plans they had for us—and they’ve only gained more power as the years of money printing went on.

Knowing grassroots community and productive local economies are the only fighting chance, we got to work building a local food business in 2020 that would make the greatest impact possible in our circle of control. From there we helped found a local food co-op and were homeschooling our children. 

When things got so restrictive that even we felt the pinch, living such a free lifestyle, I knew things were getting bad. The PM started demonizing citizens and the propaganda was getting scary. 

We were inches from seeking transfer to the states, even after all we’d been building towards solutions in our neck of the woods. We were at a loss for how we could possibly take on a dictatorship that was showing some significant historical patterns which typically end in genocide. 

Then the truckers rolled through. 

We had a reason to hope again. 

We didn’t feel so alone in our struggles.

We saw a massive amount of spiritual power in the people, marching on 18wheels toward greater personal freedom on by one. 

It was then I was convinced that freedom is not granted; freedom is claimed. 
We are victorious. 