Alexandra Leavey
Jun 8, 2026, 8:41 AM (2 days ago)
to me, Community

Hello Sarah,

 

I’m happy to connect with you to advise that your application to Alterna’s Financial Inclusion Granting Program has been selected for Proposal submission. 

 

Please note the following important information surrounding your Proposal:

 

Proposal deadline: June 26, 2026, at 11:59 pm ET

 

In addition to expanding on the content requested within the application form, please elaborate on the following topics in your Proposal: 

Detailed budget for your proposed Program/Project.
Opportunities for Alterna Savings to be represented, collaborate, or have Alterna employees participate through your proposed Program/Project.
Opportunities for program replication and/or impact to additional regions.
Partnership opportunities with Alterna Savings that would allow for relationship fostering and program longevity.
Any additional information for the benefit of the Financial Inclusion Granting Program Committee, including supporting information/documentation relevant to the submission. 
 

It is strongly recommended to elaborate on the questions within the Application Form and the submission points noted above when compiling your organization’s Proposal. We ask that Proposals do not exceed 3-pages in length.  

 

Please submit your final Proposal in PDF format to community.grants@alterna.ca before the deadline. Once submitted to community.grants@alterna.ca, your application, Proposal, and any supporting documentation will be reviewed by Alterna Savings’ Financial Inclusion Granting Program Committee. Proposals will be evaluated on several criteria including but not limited to potential for replication or scale of the initiative, the proposed Program/Project impact, and measurable results. 

 

Should you have any questions or require any support with your Proposal submission, please don’t hesitate to reach out to me directly anytime. Thank you in advance for your valuable time in composing your Proposal and have a fantastic rest of your day!

 

Sincerely,

 