
Business Plan
807 Food Co-op Inc.
Dryden, ON
January 2023









Table of Contents


















Company Profile
Business Overview
The 807 Food Cooperative is a non-profit, producer-led co-op, dedicated to the resolution of food security issues in Northern Ontario.  Built upon the intention to serve the community utilizing an online marketplace with weekly pick-up, direct-to-consumer subscription boxes, meal kits and a wholesale business-to-business program, the 807 Food Coop hopes to help bridge some of the barriers surrounding supply chain issues and food distribution in the 807 area code region. 

Models to Promote Food Security
“Food security exists when all people, at all times, have physical, social and economic access to sufficient, safe and nutritious food that meets their dietary needs and food preferences for an active and healthy life. The four pillars of food security are availability, access, utilization and stability.”- Global Strategic Framework for Food Security & Nutrition
The 807 Food Coop will address those four pillars (availability, access, utilization and stability) by offering all local food producers the opportunity to become members and sell their items through our online marketplace, thereby increasing local production and availability and providing access to individual and business consumers on a consistent weekly basis.  In addition the 807 Food Coop will also offer recipe and menu ideas featuring local food items and provide education and training as to how to procure and utilize local and traditional foods.

Why a Cooperative?
Cooperatives have a rich tradition of many producers coming together to build cohesive organizations that serve their common interests. While cooperatives can serve many purposes, from group purchase programs to unified branding, what form the cooperative takes is determined by democratic membership votes. As a result, cooperatives may evolve over time and are subject to change as market conditions shift. Generally, cooperatives in Canada have focused on building wealth for their members while also being good corporate citizens. In order for small-to-medium scale Northern Ontario producers to meet the needs of communities or organizations conducting group or large purchasing to resolve their food security issues, a cooperative model has been established to facilitate the logistics required to meet larger local needs with distributed local production.

Food Box Programs
Through the 807 Food Coop, consumers will have access to predetermined multi-producer food boxes featuring unprepared, local food items with suggested recipes and/or product information cards.  Examples include Taco Kit (featuring ground beef, local seasonings, available fresh produce and bannock taco shell mix), Breakfast Box (featuring breakfast sausages, local pancake mix, maple syrup and eggs), Spaghetti and Meatballs (featuring local pasta, meatballs (or ground beef), pasta sauce and cheese), and Seasonal Holiday Boxes (ham/turkey, potatoes, carrots, dessert etc.).  
Consumers will also have the option to customize their purchase with additional items available both through the online marketplace, with weekly ordering and distribution or at the time of pick-up as well.  All food boxes and online orders will be for pick-up only.
In addition, the 807 Food Coop, with the help of local producers, hopes to institute a lunch program through local schools and seniors centers, offering a cost-effective and nutritious solution to their traditional hot-lunch programs with delivery options available for this program only.

Farmers Markets
Farmers’ Markets enable 807 Food Co-op to establish a brand, acquire additional producer membership, acquire new consumer clients, and liquidate excess products. While the 807 has not yet established its own booth, a portion of the marketing budget has been applied for this to generate appropriate signage, business cards, and other media essential to establishing a brand that can represent Northern Ontario producers by having open and equitable membership induction practices.


Company History
The 807 Food Co-Op originally began as the 807 Collective.  In October of 2020 a group of local producers led by Natalie Welniak (of Busters BBQ) and Kailey Divers (of Foraged North) recognized the need for a local, covid safe marketplace and created an online platform to amalgamate participating producers’ existing online stores into one website where local consumers could shop from each producers’ website directly and pick-up their items at a centralized outdoor location weekly.  Coming together with Bobbie Parr (of Parrs Jars, established in June of 2020) and Bobbi Turpin (formerly of The Pure Blend Pasta) their group worked with Benjamin Feagin Jr. (of Agritech North), Brent Cadeau (of Northwest Beef) and Jennifer Springett-Esposito (of Local Food & Farming Cooperative) to form what is now the 807 Food Cooperative Inc.
Incorporated on August 31, 2021, the 807 Food Coop will expand on the weekly ordering and pick-up cycle by working with local producers such as Parrs Jars, Northwest Beef and more to provide a wide variety of local food procurement options utilizing their online store which allows all consumers from individuals to governments and institutions to shop for year-round food boxes, assorted individual food items and fulfill larger wholesale contracts from all producer members in one easy to access site with weekly pick-up in a centralized location in downtown Dryden.  
With funding support from Local Food & Farming Cooperative, the 807 Food Coop was able to purchase freezers and equipment needed to help expand area production and assist with order storage and delivery, as well as fund 6 educational events and hire a part-time coordinator to oversee the initial set-up and daily operations as well as plan and execute scheduled events.

Management Team
The following management team make up the five members of the 807 Food Co-op Board of Directors: Bobbie Parr, Natalie Welniak, Brent Cadeau, Samantha Black & Bobbi Turpin (to be replaced). In addition, as a member of the Local Food and Farm Co-ops, our regional coordinator Jennifer Springett-Esposito is added as an advisor who has, and continues to, significantly contribute to the success of the organization. Resumes and/or CVs for everyone can be found in Appendix B – Management Resumes.

Legal Structure
“807 FOOD CO-OPERATIVE INC.” has been issued a certificate of incorporation under the Cooperative Corporation Act effective August 31, 2021, as a Cooperative Without Share Capital. The appropriate documentation is attached as Appendix C – Incorporation Documents. 
Mission
Providing quality, locally grown and crafted products through a grassroots food system to foster self-sufficiency and sustainability in Northwestern Ontario.
Vision
The catalyst towards an innovative, self-sustaining local food system to improve our NWO economy and the health of our communities. Changing with the times, producers will effectively collaborate.

Short-Term Milestones
*insert revised chart

2023 Goals
Enhance organizational stability.
Expand supplier and customer base.
Generate operating funds.


Market Research 
Industry Profile and Outlook
The nature of the agricultural sector in the region is that it has remained largely unchanged in regards to the size and quantity of farms and farmland, but there has been a continual small-scale decline in the industry while the farms benefit from reduced operating costs over time but have largely unchanged profits, likely due to innovation and other capital improvements that are only keeping pace with agri-food pricing. (Dungannon Consulting Services, 2011; Statistics Canada, 2017)
Four prior mini profiles of food security projects operating in Ontario are provided in Dungannon’s report: the Dryden Locavore Project, the Ottawa Valley Food Cooperative, Eat Local Sudbury, and the Thunder Bay Country Market. We will briefly outline the findings of these three models, which informed the 807 Food Co-op’s direction.
The Dryden Locavore Project offered food subscription boxes on both a full payment up-front and bi-weekly payment schedule. The boxes were distributed on a bi-weekly basis, with each box valued at $22 or $200 for the season, totaling 18 weeks (10 Boxes). There were 30 participants in the program and a waiting list was required due to such high interest in the region. All participants were satisfied with quality at least “most of the time,” and more than half (62%) were satisfied with the value. The box contained bread, meat, salad dressing, and vegetables such as carrots, potatoes, peas, and beans. A newsletter was generated that outlined the box contents and provided recipes to accompany the box program. Time to operate the program was in-kind by a Health Educator and Kenora District Soil and Crop Improvement Association (KDSCIA), lowering the costs of operation to only having to pay for the products being provided to consumers. All proceeds were forwarded on to producers; the program retained no fees.
The Ottawa Valley Food Cooperative listed more than 974 different products from 41 producers on a website for consumers to purchase. Consumers can order only within an eight-day window for an upcoming month. The co-op then conveys orders afterwards in a five-day window, during which adjustments to consumer orders may be required as stock is confirmed. Final invoices and payments are then generated. Boxes are assembled by volunteers, including distribution to consumers’ homes.  10% fees are charged to a seller and 5% is charged to the buyer. The co-op was structured as a without-share capital non-profit co-op. Consumers must pay a $50 membership fee for a lifetime membership. For a producer to become a member, they must first register as a consumer and then pay an additional $50 fee to become a lifetime producer member. Producers must go through a jury process to be admitted as a producer to the co-op. All members are equal in democratic processes, in a single class of membership. The on-line ordering system was noted to provide flexibility to both consumers and producers. This model offers the most flexibility to the producer on how to price their product and what quantity they wish to make available. A downside was the consumers having to coordinate their pick-up times around a very short pick-up window. A reliance on volunteers was also noted as a weakness.
Eat Local Sudbury went as far to operate a local food grocery store, which was likely more feasible due to the higher population density in Sudbury, ON. The co-op provides products from 55 local producers sourced from within 150 miles of Sudbury. The co-op is non-profit with a volunteer board of directors elected by members. It is a multi-stakeholder cooperative with consumers and producer memberships. Every member is entitled to a vote at an Annual General Meeting (AGM). A public health nutritionist is on the board. Producer memberships are $50. Non-member producers are permitted to sell through the co-op but only receive 75% of the retail price. Members, on the other hand, receive 80-90% of the retail price. Consumer memberships are $15 for an individual or $25 for a family, a vote is provided at the AGM, and a 4% discount is provided off the retail price except fresh produce in the summer. Co-op cred is offered to consumer members, enabling deeper discounts in exchange for volunteer time (16 hours in a month qualifies for a 20% discount). Product is generally marked up 20-30% to enable the co-op to be self-sustaining. A separate non-profit, the Sudbury Good Food Box was established to handle food box subscriptions and was specifically geared towards lowering the cost of fresh food in the region.
The Thunder Bay Country Market is a non-profit operating a farmers’ market in Thunder Bay, ON. It features 40-70 vendors on a weekly basis. Almost all products are local, and non-local products are required to be labeled as such, and local products are given preference. 64 vendors were featured on the website, with approximately 40% being farmers. Membership is open to the public and costs $100 for five years. Vendors are eligible to be members. 
