100KM only distribute themselves in the Toronto and Niagara areas.   I use my account to shop their website and then arrange the freight myself to pick up at their warehouse in N.York.  I primarily use ERB to deliver up to me.  They only ship up to Thunder Bay on Wednesdays and Saturdays so I choose 100km Tuesday or Friday pickup options.  Their deadlines for ordering are Sunday or Wednesday midnight then I think...  I'm working on finding a cheaper option but it's difficult for temperature-controlled transport.

The best freight rates are to get an LTL skid rate quote (versus a per-order weight rate) and ship min. 2 skids per order (there is a small premium for only 1 skid).  However, that means you really need to try and maximize what goes on a skid which requires the person ordering to understand a bit about the products and how 100km would build the skid up.  Sometimes it is about weight - max is 2200 lbs but usually, it's more about understanding the packaging from the farms and how much cubic volume that would fill up - each skid is 42x48x~84".  My system is to build the order I really need and then look at the size/weight and maybe add on some more volume to make sure I fill it up.   I usually have a few boxes of frozen items as well that they count just as if they were "on top" of my skid, however they separate them and ship them in separate compartments to keep the main skid about 3 degrees and the frozen -19.  This is not a 100% perfect system.  I have produce that has come in close to zero and so sensitive items can be damaged (peppers, cucumbers, herbs, mushrooms, etc).  The claims process is onerous so I usually just sort it myself and take the small losses when I have to.   The bigger problem is if you were relying on an item for a specific order/box/dinner...  100k does not pack skids normally for shipment (they are primarily delivering smaller orders to restaurants) so their experience with it seems mostly due to my orders.  They have become good at it and do a special wrap for me to help protect things, but I don't think they are set up to provide advice or help build an order to fit on a skid for example.  They obviously are also in the middle here so charge what seems to be about 15-20% margin to us on the products.  The end result of that plus the freight costs means some bulky, heavy items like say carrots or cabbage which are also inexpensive can double in price/lb making them significantly more expensive than any competing products in the grocery store/restaurant supply chain.  However these are items we can grow in the north as well and so need to bring in less often.  The other issue is that they are primarily focused on restaurants so products they offer can be more for professional kitchen use/ large pack sizes then the smaller products and packaing for retail consumers.

I've almost mastered this process after 6 years...    The ideal scenario to start I think would definitely be for other coops to send their lists to me and then I could add in our needs and get it all shipped to Thunder Bay where we would sort and split and send it on to Dryden/Sioux Lookout maybe.  Unless they are buying big volumes themselves to fill at least a full skid.   Over time they would develop the skill to just order their own.  


