TSP Guest Form

Bio

Bobbie is a community development practitioner living on a hunters homestead in Wabigoon, Ontario Canada. Bobbie has been building her homestead with her husband and two kids for the last 7years and pre-2020, was furthering her career leading the Recreation Therapy department for seniors with dementia. 

Being on maternity leave when covid hit, Bobbie quickly recognized the narrative that the establishment was spinning and knew her career in long term care would come to an end. Canada was seriously draconian with their vaccine policies and the treatment of seniors was horrendous, she wouldn’t be able to bear witnessing the residents take the brunt of the regulatory abuse by returning to that job. She knew it was likely that they wouldn’t even let people who didn’t get vaccinated return, and sure enough they mandated it and cleaned house the month after she was set to return. 

Along with her husbands help, Bobbie spent her maternity leave and “covid years” building:
-a local food business
-a community production kitchen with indoor kratky beds and cold storage
-a local food co-op 
All while spending those years homeschooling to avoid sending the kids into mask mania.

Bobbie now spends her days coordinating the local food co-op initiatives, running the production facility, getting her product line of smoked salts onto store shelves and engaging in activities that further her families self-sufficiency. 

Her hunters homestead is much like Jack’s childhood. They live a very seasonal lifestyle that offers more flexibility than a traditional homestead, which leans on animal husbandry.

The freezers are full of deer, moose, partridge, walleye, trout and crappie. The surrounding land offers blueberries, raspberries, Saskatoon berries and a plethora of wild mushrooms. The garage is stacked with fur from our trapping activities October-February. The summer garden and pantry are full of things we can pickle, ferment or use for value added products like zucchini lasagna and moose stew. 

Bobbie was inexperienced in business, but tapped into irrational exuberance and hit the ground running developing decentralized initiatives with the aim of spurring innovation, creating lifestyle freedom and building food security.


Choose one topic:
Building Local Community To Combat The Collapse 

8-10 questions to be asked

1. How did you get into the hunters homestead lifestyle?
2. Why did you choose starting a food business over finding another job?
3. What hurdles did you run into starting a business without any experience? 
4. What made you build a commercial production kitchen and kratky grow op?
5. Why run a food hub rather than the re-sales food business model you started with?
6. How can starting a non-profit food organization in Canada chip away at the globalist agenda?
7. How is it dealing with local politics and government funding when I’m  anarchist leaning? 
8. What skills or resources are helpful to start a food co-op, hub or business if you have no idea what you’re doing?
9. Any advice for people looking to take more initiative in their community? 
10. How can we support the work you do?
