2.4 Project Overview 
Consult the Appendix – Application Assessment Criteria section of the RED Program Guidelines for  all assessment criteria and how they may apply to your project.  
i) Project summary 
State the purpose of the project and provide a brief overview of what the project will achieve. (Maximum 300 words) 

”Farmers find it challenging to make a living growing food, and consumers find it difficult to make the good food choices they want to make.” --Metcalf Foundation 

Non-conventional small scale farmers/producers, on-farm processors, and/or mixed farming in northern Ontario struggle with industrial supply management value chains. Producing predictable amounts of commodities is difficult and doesn't benefit from economies of scale. Products are sold through alternative outlets, producers do their own marketing and large distances between communities complicate logistics. More recently, Covid-19 continues to challenge the food value chain in Dryden, and the surrounding region.  

The purpose is to support a re-emerging strategic economic pillar and support the operating environment for agri-food partners to meet local consumer food demands. With the Community Development Dryden (CDD), 3 food based collaboratives will establish local distribution with the aid of technology, and function as a type of food hub where their diversification will contribute a layer of resiliency and protection against market volatility.

Regional food clusters have been identified as a way to revitalize local food systems. A flexible, regionally based food economy would support the fastest-growing segments of the food sector:  ecological, local, and organic foods. Local markets are underserviced from small producers to small scale processors. Economic opportunities are not being realized. 

Virtual Food Hubs that focus on innovative distribution events will be where the supply chain (farmer) meets the value chain (consumer). The Co-operative Food Hub Development shared vision is to increase market access for rural, remote, low income and marginalized groups in the Kenora region of north western Ontario.

This project will achieve a solid foundation for a food sector to begin to emerge through partnership development, hub implementation and trainings, job growth, community capacity enrichment and the positive benefits of increased economic activity in rural communities.

ii) Project impacts 
Describe any anticipated impacts the project will have across multiple communities, sectors, or across parts of a value chain and how they would be measured. (Maximum 200 words) 

Multiple Communities re-establish & revitalize supply chains in the Kenora district. Strengthened local economies through inter-dependent place-based development contributes to long-term job and business retention. Allows for incubation of small and medium sized Northern producers.

Sectors (agricultural, processing, transportation, distribution, consumer)  Underutilized backhauling opportunities offset costs. Convenience for distributors and outside markets to have space to aggregate multi-vendor products is attractive. Collaborative marketing & business support improves capacity for participating businesses and suppliers. Consumers benefit from increased access to healthy locally produced food. 

Value Chain strengthened with improved access to cold storage, value added processing, and distribution channels. Manufacturers not dependent on complex global supply chains will produce for regional markets. Diversity breeds resilience which allows for a reimagining of business models based on the unique biology and culture of a given region.

Measure using social and environmental impact criteria, and leveraging partner oversight (NFDN) to influence future Northern food projects:
- # of participating business
- # of markets served
- # of communities participating 
- # of jobs created
- # of business retained or expanded as a result of project
- # of customers served
- revenue increases
-# of events hosted
-# of backhauling opportunities

iii) Reducing economic barriers 
Describe how this project will reduce existing barriers to economic development and reference any plans or studies where these have been identified. (Maximum 200 words) 

-lack of economic innovation culture when local economy is rooted in forestry & mining sectors resulting in difficulty mobilizing underdeveloped sectors
-lack of Northern Ontario Multimodal Transportation Strategy to guide single sustainable collaborative solutions. Largest markets Winnipeg (west) Thunder Bay (east) are 4 hr drives
-lack of agricultural production hinges on inadequate systems of appropriate-scale distribution and storage facilities & high start-up costs
-a lack of communication networks among potential allies & actors coupled with a lack of basic development resources and training geared to food hubs

STRATEGIC ACUPUNCTURE
-online technology (sharing economy model) circumvents many barriers by allowing coordination of resources & distribution, enhanced communication and expanded market reach
-engage Dryden EcDev & goals that align with this project (Local and Regional Food Network: support the growth of local and regional food networks) to support emerging economic pillar; LFFC’s mandate provides the infrastructure to support training; 
-co-op model rebalances local food value chain & reduces production costs by providing project partners: shortened supply chains, access to storage, food transformation

-Menu 2020, 10 Good Food Ideas for Ontario, Metcalf Food Solutions
-Northern Ontario Agri-Food Strategy  
-Dryden Economic Development Strategic Plan
-Northern Ontario Food Systems, A Scan of Infrastructure & Transportation: LFFC Report
-Towards a Feasible Cooperative (2011)

RED5 (EN) 4.0 Application Form Page 5 of 
iv) Sustainability 
Describe how the project outcomes will continue to contribute to longer-term economic development outcomes after the RED program funding ends. (Maximum 200 words)

Leveraging existing assets at the hub enables market access for producers in surrounding small rural communities such as Emo & Dorion. Furthermore, this collaboration will enable products from hub participants to be distributed to Sioux Lookout via Northwest Beef’s existing distribution channel. Backhaul opportunities to bring goods back to the hub can then be pursued. Producers do not have the time to  build these partnerships or investigate these opportunities to enhance and sustain their businesses, but once in place, the effects will be long lasting.

-increasing investment readiness in Dryden community, (built on year 1 communication training and skills);  cemented partnerships with Northwest Business Centre and local community futures (PACE) to support continued business and workforce development;

-value net creation through collaboration with the intent of continued growth through established social media strategies, and online market platforms (that will be self-supporting); NFDN will continue to support project through their mandate

-access to infrastructure will continue (and expand on benefits of sharing economy) effective communication trainings, listed strategies and reports, vision (greater than the sum of its parts...compounded value of the chain)  The work of this funding will create a regional attraction, inspire possibility, leveraging underutilized spaces and establish regional competitiveness



v) Project oversight 
Describe the resources and skills the applicant(s) will use to manage and complete the project. Identify an individual(s) who will be the leading the project and their experience in implementing similar projects. (Maximum 200 words) 

Each LFFC project area engages a collaboration of stakeholders to contribute to a strong regional food system in northern Ontario from field to fork. For over a decade, LFFC has combined business development training for collaborative and cooperative businesses with infrastructure development to ensure a robust framework for food and farm businesses to succeed in the north. 

LFFC is committed to place-based economic development, ensuring that expertise, management and ownership of new and established businesses is regional, and that the benefits of growth and job creation remain regional. For example, during the Northwest Beef Co-op development, led by Jen Springett, LFFC partnered with livestock producers, abattoirs, finishing yards and markets across northwest Ontario. The Northern Food Distribution Network (NFDN), coordinated by LFFC’s NFDN Coordinator, is an important new collaborative with 16 steering committee members representing organizations and issues across the supply chain. 

 Jen Springett (this project lead), was the lead founder and developer of the multi-stakeholder collaborative marketing and distribution Cloverbelt Local Food Co-op from 2013-2019. That co-op grew to support over 140 producers, 1600 consumers, and distributed to 7 rural northern communities. Jen and the LFFC team are well suited to bring this project to its stated objectives.


2.5 Outcomes 
Choose at least three of the following outcomes and describe how your RED project addresses it i) Jobs created or retained 
Indicate the number of total jobs that will be created or retained in rural Ontario, as a result of the project: 


Temporary Jobs  
(e.g., seasonal,  
construction) 
Part-time  
(e.g., approximately 20  hours/week) 
Full-time 
Jobs created 
1
2
1
Jobs retained 


15
30+



This question is continued on page 7 

Provide details to substantiate these job numbers (Maximum 100 words)  

This project will lead to the creation of a part-time hub coordinator. Parr’s Jars will require additional part-time support, in addition to seasonal support in the market garden.  Northwest Beef will require a full time manager to  support their marketing, distribution and coordinated processing efforts. At least 15 producers/suppliers will be able to retain their positions by having a secure and flexible marketplace that supports their unique needs. In some cases, these farms employ both husband and wife in the family,  and are supported by part-time staff or children.


ii) Investment attracted or retained 
Describe in detail how the project will lead to the attraction and retention of investments in rural Ontario, and how this will be measured. (Maximum 300 words) 
Across the north, attracting and retaining a competitive workforce remains a chronic issue, particularly for remote and rural communities such as Dryden. A frequent barrier encountered when attempting to recruit professionals or business owners, can be available employment opportunities for spouses.  Developing community based infrastructure to grow and revive the agricultural sector will support Dryden’s need to diversify away from the forestry & mining sectors, while building the community profile and improving access to healthy, fresh foods. Good local food markets appeal to young families and  support healthy lifestyles, which support greater connections between local residents and their community.  Infrastructure and collaborative support programs to attract and retain local farms and food businesses encourage the continued preservation and cultivation of surrounding farm lands, further increasing community connections and preservation of local heritage. Small farmers who seek to acquire northern farmland often look for a supportive farming community, readily available marketplace, and necessary infrastructure for value-added food creation, cold storage, and product aggregation such as a community food hub. This is critical for a community like Dryden, which is four hours from the nearest urban centre, increasing the need for self-reliance, by nearly eliminating access to urban food markets and infrastructure.  The jobs created, in addition to the number of agri-food producers and consumers engaged with hub programs, events, and product sales will readily measure this food hub’s role in building these community connections. 


iii)Businesses attracted, retained and/or expanded 
Describe in detail how the project will lead to the attraction, retention and/or expansion of businesses to the area in rural Ontario, and what results will be achieved. 
(Maximum 300 words) 

By organizing the food chain in a way which maximizes benefits to producers and consumers, an attractive hub will exist which offers collaborative marketing benefits, product aggregation, access to refrigerated and dry storage, and commercial kitchen access for value added product creation. Freezer and cold storage is a crucial element for small scale producers as it allows for an extended season and off-season revenue. One partner, Parrs Jars, currently leases space in an underutilized building, where additional units are available for lease to complementary food businesses. Given the isolated nature, and low population density of rural communities in Northwestern Ontario, shared infrastructure is critical to support small business development and create regional food distribution opportunities. A hub to support collaborative cross-community marketing is essential to achieve economies of scale for further distribution.

Businesses will be attracted to the hub via several mechanisms. 
Tyler Peacock, Dryden Economic Development Manager. Referring complimentary businesses
Events to showcase programs, expand markets, and educate producers to support scaling up
Partner networks and outreach, including local agricultural associations
Social media and email campaigns
Radio campaign and local media coverage
Resulting word-of-mouth, particularly effective in isolated rural communities 

The benefits of increasing local production extend beyond the farmers. Small-scale farms circulate
money nearly twice as much as larger farms (Swenson, Eathington, & Chase, 2007). If consumers
increase their consumption of local foods, they can return economic benefits to their communities. In
a population of 130,000, for instance, if everyone consumed five locally-grown fruits and vegetables
each day for the three months they are in season that would create 475 jobs and more than 6 million
dollars of labor income (Swedson, 2008). Reorienting the networks between farmers and consumers may reduce environmental costs linked to food miles, reducing the wear and tear on local highways.


iv)Enhanced strategic economic infrastructure 
Describe in detail how the project will advance economic development and investment opportunities in rural Ontario, and what results will be achieved. Provide information on previously completed work (e.g. plans, strategies, research, data) that identifies this project as an economic development priority. (Maximum 300 words)  


Food hubs focus on each link in the value chain- farmers, consumers, distributors, processors, institutional buyers, etc. Collaborative partners form a ‘value net’ by leveraging competitive advantages and combining the unique and value added resources of each individual entity and overcoming shared obstacles. They do all of this, while building a strong community around food, and preserving the agricultural heritage of their region.

In Dryden’s strategic plan, eight strategic priorities are listed, of which this project serves five. To attract new businesses by promoting Dryden as a regional business and transportation hub;  to support existing businesses in Dryden; to partner with other communities and organizations to foster local and regional growth; to identify necessary resources to drive economic growth; and to respond to economic related actions in the community development plan.

Northern food hub development aligns with the objectives identified within the Northern Food Distribution Network’s Action Plan. This plan was developed from (2017-2019) cross-northern consultations, where stakeholders established key barriers  which inhibit food distribution.  These objectives are: 1) Develop high quality online communication system(s) to transfer knowledge and improve food system coordination; 2) Develop physical assets to support more efficient food distribution;  3) Build resilient human capital throughout the north for enterprise development and community food self-determination.

The first recommendation in the Kenora District Agricultural Economic Impact Study is the examination of cooperatives, by producers, to facilitate infrastructure development like processing and storage facilities.

“Towards a Feasible Co-operative Report”,  suggested Dryden should seek to create an entity that: 
-builds upon both local capacity and prior success;
-grows incrementally;
-accounts for five indicators: Seek a Broader Vision (addresses the needs of the broader community, Next Generation (the drive behind food security innovations comes from a younger demographic), Collaboration, Self-Help, and Self-Interest.


v) Regional partnerships that drive growth 
Describe in detail how the project will work with other entities in your region in rural Ontario (e.g., groups, organizations, communities, municipalities) to drive growth. 
(Maximum 300 words) 

Food hubs create bridges between farmers and customers by aggregating agri-food products, providing services and infrastructure that helps supply reach demand. Each partner has their vested interests, and roles in the success of this collaboration.  

The 807 Collective- Nat Welniak, owner/operator of Buster’s BBQ sauce, uses graphic design background to develop, host and market a Covid inspired website. Covid-19 obstructs traditional market venues, she (and eight other vendors) deliver to a centralized parking lot, weekly, to fill that identified gap. The 807 site directs traffic to vendors for sales, and coordinates of product delivery. 

Parrs Jars-  hydronic producer of salad greens and seasonal market garden operator. Bobbie Parr noted food access vulnerabilities with Covid, and put her community development degree to work. She responded with a collaborative zero waste multi vendor subscription, featuring living greens in mason jars. After converting a trailer for cold storage, alongside her leased space to scale up services for this opportunity, she embarked on commercial kitchen construction. Her vision is to see this space benefit a community of food producers. 

Northwest Beef- A regional marketing co-operative. Beef produced throughout the region and processed in Thunder Bay, Rainy River or Oxdrift is distributed in Dryden and Sioux Lookout. The group is poised to launch, or join a collaborative website, for spring 2021 distribution to address their growing inventory management and e-commerce needs. 

The Community Development Department for the City of Dryden - manager Tyler Peacock, eagerly  supports this project as a means to revive the agricultural sector, and reinforce central distribution depot progress for the region of Kenora. Competitive infrastructures have been built and maintained for primary industries, a service sector, and knowledge based activities. Dryden is faced with limited financial resources to directly support the array of opportunities for a population of 8,000 residents.



