Although I knew regulations were burdensome in the food game, I really had no idea how burdensome. 

I began making our smoked salts as a circular economy initiative. I had excess, nutrient dense hydroponic and micro greens that we had grown, so I freeze dried them and brainstormed how to use them. 

I could put them in soup, hide them in casseroles, etc. I then tried mixing it in smoked Himalayan salt (with homegrown tomato powder and other balancing powders) and it was amazing! That’s how our green salt was born. 

I quickly created the Salty Onion blend with the massive amount of onions and greens coming out of Walls Farm and our garden. We freeze dry the onion and greens to make our blends. 

Shortly after I invested in overcoming labelling regulations, finding bulk jars (the shipping is insane to NWO) and finding a new pre-smoked Canadian salt (also b/c regulations for smoking and trust for salt source)…I thought I was off to the races. 

Unfortunately, I was then approached by the health unit saying I cannot use freeze dried product unless I send each farm ingredient away for moisture testing and other testing. Which is funny because the only moisture problem I ever had was from the commercial salt that I was forced to switch to (which I have to freeze dry myself now to overcome). 

The health unit states that I must go through the procedures for testing my “made in a licensed kitchen, licensed food handled, farm ingredient” by sending it all away to the lab, and potentially the farms will need GAP certification. They stated the recommended approach is buying ingredients commercially instead. 

I had orders to meet so I bought chives, onion powder, kale powder (because microgreen powder commercially is insanely priced if you can even find it) and dialed my recipes in differently.

However, now my value proposition is gone. My story of why we make them and how they solve a waste problem just vanished into thin air. 

Whats the point anymore? We don’t have enough of a market here to keep throwing money and energy into a hole. It costs twice the amount to ship spice bottles to Northwestern Ontario than it does for the bottles themselves. 

Combine that with 807 Food Co-op losing Farmers Market status — the Ontario Ministry says online markets can no longer be considered exempt markets (after 3 years of building our model and following the regulations) and that we immediately had to delist products from home kitchens (that sell into the in person markets). This is why you no longer see Five Acre baking and Vintage Kitchen sourdough through 807. 

Honestly, that just scratched the surface. We can’t sell into Manitoba and need CFIA approval, requiring hiring consultants to create a preventative control plan and more. 

807 tried to get a food safety grant to support producers in safety planning and were denied. We tried to get the food hub covered so producers could use a subsidized licensed kitchen; Denied. We tried to get a moisture testing tool with a grant; Denied. I won’t even go into the hurdles with getting dairy into our town.

The government talks out both sides of their mouth—they want us to better manage waste and food supply, but instead tie us up in red tape if we actually try to harness local resources.

Right now, it feels the government puts up hurdle after hurdle, and there aren’t enough people buying locally to make food businesses worthwhile around here. 

The in person Dryden farmers market has been having a serious lack of attendance the past few years. 807 has had a lack of customer traction online. And from what I hear, most other local food operators are seeing the same regional trend; a plummeting customer base since 2021.

If you don’t buy your food locally, I’m not being hyperbolic when I say one day you will wake up and there will be no homegrown items left for you to buy. We will all suffer whatever listeria or new chemical they insert into the food supply (Apeel, Glyphosate, etc) and that is what we must buy, unless we grow it ourselves. Families who produce food will do it for their friends and family, because the juice is just not worth the squeeze anymore to put it on the market. 

Hopefully we can continue working towards supporting others to grow and process their own food, because the idea of finding a profit through production feels like a losing battle in this day and age.