Supply Chain Resilience Analysis 
Overview 


Key Outcomes: 


Map the routes between these points and calculate an approximate distribution cost between the points for unrefrigerated shelf stable product transportation and refrigerated transportation.
Optimize the palettes? 
Map waypoints between the main centers – satellite towns that might have decent population density and buying power – and calculate transportation costs between the waypoints. Map wholesale contracts including  retailers, restaurants, and institutional foodservice (schools, healthcare etc.) with buying power.
One contract, willing to make sure, moving to Thunder Bay, 
Map customer locations - by population density and income distribution – to complement the distribution strategy.
Tool and technology recommendations to optimize distribution routes, improve efficiencies and build sustainable food distribution for local food producers and processors. 
Map clusters of producers to show where your producers are relative to your outlets. We have about 150 entities that you gave us and we supplemented these previously. Let us know if this is valuable.




Distribution and Aggregation Points 

Superior Seasons: 752 Candy Mountain Dr, Slate River Valley, ON P7J 0C2
807 Food Co-op & Hub: 106-60 Princess St, Dryden, ON, Canada, Ontario
Sioux Lookout: The Hub Roastery: 69 Front St, Sioux Lookout, ON P8T 1A3

Potential Distributors 

Manitoulin Transport Address: 15 Richan Road, Dryden, ON P8N 3G2
Lock City Dairies: 


Manitoulin Transport Terminal in Thunder Bay, Ontario 
Address: 15 Richan Road, Dryden, ON P8N 3G2

Manitoulin Transport Address: 15 Richan Road, Dryden, ON P8N 3G2
Lock City Dairies: 


Order and Payment:

What is the minimum order quantity?
What are your payment terms?

Logistics and Shipping:

How do you handle shipping and logistics?
What are the shipping costs and delivery times?
Do you offer any tracking options for shipments?

Support and Communication:

What kind of support do you offer to your clients?
Is there a designated account manager for assistance?
What communication channels do you use?

Exclusivity and Contracts:
Are there exclusivity agreements associated with your distribution?
What is the duration of any contracts or agreements?

Compliance and Regulations:
How do you ensure that products meet regulatory standards?
What documentation do you provide for compliance purposes?





Delivery Trailer 


We have access to a refrigeration 11 x 7 trailer, which is 172 per square footage. It is hauled with a ¾ ton truck and run with A/C and a cool bot powered by a generator. Frozen goods go into a cooler with ice at the bottom to maintain temperature and the trailer is maintained at 2-4C for refrigerated products. Items that should not be refrigerated (ie. Basil) would be stored in the cab of the truck. There currently isn’t any shelving inside or fastening materials, as well as it is in need of a washable floor. 


Geographical Location 






Challenges and Barriers 


The cost of distribution. When we put together the costs and times of aggregating, distributing the food it is quite high (for example: cost of mileage is $.62 x 338 = $209.59, $30 x 13 hours for wages is $390.00. 


Hours of service requirements. The driver must have 10 hours off-duty in a day and the driver cannot drive more than 13 hours a day. (For example it is one hour to pack the truck, 4 hours to drive to Dryden including a 15 minute break, an hour break for lunch, 4 hours to drive back to Dryden, including 15 minute break and then one hour to unpack the truck). 


Options for a sustainable model. Do producers share the delivery vehicle? How much product can we fit into a 11x7 truck, how much product do we have to fill each truck to break-even?


Potential Shared Distribution Partnerships 

Dryden to Thunder Bay 

Cloverbelt Country Meats 
Huber's Bavarian Meats
Nautical Coffee 
Hub Roastery Coffee
Parrs Jars 
Buster’s BBQ Sauce 
Foraged North

Thunder Bay to Dryden 

Eat the Fish 
Debruin’s Greenhouses
Kevin Belluz 
Brulee Creek Farms
My Pride Farm
Sleepy G Farm
Big Lake Pasta
Slate River Dairy

