Anarchy- posted twitter and Damus 

Anarchy isn’t “no rules” but “no rulers”. The non-aggression principle is paramount - “Don’t hurt others or take their stuff”.

Government does both of those things as a hard rule.

I would agree with Ammous in that government, no matter how small, will always grow and act out of self interest, as all people do.

I believe this human trait is amplified in the worst way through politics, mainly because it’s comprised of people who seek power over others in addition to being guided by self-interest. At this point it’s incredibly corrupted by central planners who have used and abused the system. It will always end up corrupted this way through cycles of revolution.

The best leaders are not drawn to politics and if they are, they are forced to give up good intentions to play the game. You will have heartfelt leaders step up at the end of a cycle, but if the game itself remains, humanity will remain in the same destructive loop.

“No Government” however, doesn’t mean no governance. I believe we would thrive in voluntary governance, whether that be location based or virtual nations (as described by @jackspirko). Having guideposts and community is essential—but we should be free to choose what structure we submit to. 

With a belief in Anarchy, one must hold individual responsibility to the highest standard. If I believe that the potential of humans is being squashed by outsourcing our responsibility to the state, then I must take back control of my individual livelihood. 

This is often seen through things like:
-entrepreneurship
-homeschooling
-homesteading
-voluntary leadership
-agorism & counter economics

With Bitcoin and blockchain, we could enact governance  systems in the most simplistic way, providing true democracy through decentralization. 

If you’re interested in learning more, you can check out books by Samuel Konkin lll like “An Agorist Primer” or “New Libertarian Manifesto”. You can also read the wealth of information provided by Murray Rothbard which provides an on ramp to these ideas.

I often refer to the lifestyle as “voluntarism” so it doesn’t scare off normies. That’s essentially what it is. ❤️

REQRITE

Anarchy Redefined 🔄

1/ Anarchy isn't about the absence of rules; it's about having no rulers. Central to this idea is the non-aggression principle: "Do not harm others or take their possessions."

Governments inherently violate this principle.

2/ Growth & self-interest in government 

I concur with @saifedean that governments, no matter their size, tend to grow and act in self-interest, a common human trait.

This trait is magnified in politics when power is sought over others, leading to widespread corruption. 

3/ The political cycle & leadership 

Good leaders are disinclined towards politics, and those who enter often sacrifice their intentions. Heartfelt leaders may emerge at cycle ends, but the destructive loop persists if the political game remains intact. 

4/ Governance ≠ Government 

Having no government doesn't mean no governance. Voluntary, location-based, or virtual governance (as proposed by @jackspirko) can thrive. Communities need guiding principles, but individuals should choose their governing structures. #Decentralization

5/ Individual responsibility & Anarchy 

As an anarchist, one must prioritize individual responsibility. If we believe the state stifles human potential, reclaiming control over our lives is crucial. This manifests in various ways such as:
#Entrepreneurship
#Homeschooling
#Homesteading

6/ Decentralized solutions with Bitcoin & blockchain 

Bitcoin and blockchain can enact simple governance systems, providing true democracy through decentralization. Anarchy thrives with technological advancements like these.

7/ Want to know more? 

Dive into writings by Samuel Konkin III like "An Agorist Primer" or "New Libertarian Manifesto" to further explore the concept of anarchy, agorism, and decentralized governance. 

Together, let's reimagine the way our societies can function. #AnarchyRedefined

ADDED CONTENT COMMENTS

Libertarians work within the current system and generally believe there would be thriving by limiting the state, getting their guy in power and setting guideposts. 

The issue that most anarchists have with libertarianism (most come from that path initially) is that you can put up the fences for the state, but eventually there will be politicians removing the fence pole by pole when they need to squeeze through their agendas…and you end up back on the merry go round of limiting controls again. 

Also, libertarianism will never capture our current system IMO. All that it’s good for is slow down the creeping of the state. But they will still creep. 

Anarchy isn’t likely something I will see in my lifetime, the systems are so intertwined and people have outsourced their responsibility for far too long—people couldn’t bear it. They don’t know how to govern themselves. That disempowerment has been by design.

To me, it’s a multi generational plan to take power back for the people. The establishment works in long cycles to encapsulate humanity through centralization, the only sensible plan would require consistent and compounding moves to decentralize within every institutional framework. 

For example, my children will know that while taxes are sometimes used towards good causes, taking ownership of those causes and enacting voluntarism would create efficiencies that the state couldn’t dream of. Anarchy is a way to 10x positive impact and change the world.

If I raise skilled boys in an empathetic home with voluntarism at the heart, they will do so much more than all of our tax dollars would have done combined. The state is inefficient at making meaningful change.

If this way of living leached more and more into mainstream,  having people own their family affairs again through homeschooling and self-sufficiency practices, that would compound to heights never seen by humanity when we take tech advancements into account. 

I’m not expecting to see an anarchist system, but I will live as close to anarchy as I can. Hopefully that will radiate into influence and create a lasting governance framework for my great grandchildren.